Next up let's talk more about key events.
So I'm going to start by adding in a simple input.
So we have something to work with here.
Something that we can type into.
I'll give it an idea of user name.
Give it a place holder of user name and let's also give it a type of text.
OK so I've got my input element.
Here it is.
It's a bit small but it will work.
And we're going to see that there are at least three different options for listening for a key press
or a key down or a key up in this input.
So I'm going to select it in my javascript I'll do const input equals document dot query selector you
we used an idea of user name and then we'll add our first event listener so input that add event listener.
Let's do key down and we will want the event object because that object will contain information about
which key in particular was pressed.
But why don't we just start by ignoring it and consider logging key down.
All right.
So let's open up our console refresh the page and if I type a key in this input I'm going to hit P it
fires.
We've got key down.
If I type l we get key down.
I would if I hit shift that's a key down a number is the key down caps lock that's the key down.
You can't tell but I am hitting CAPS LOCK tab that's also key down.
So it's not just when we're actually typing some character into the input it could be the control key
the command key I'm hitting command over and over and over anytime I press a key down it's going to
fire and it's firing when the key is pressed down originally.
If we duplicate this and add a second event listener for key up and save or replace this to console
that log key up I'll refresh I'll click I'm going to start typing so I'll hit the letter P and you can
see key down fires first and then key up if I hit space.
Same thing.
Key down then key up if I hit the right arrow same thing and if I hold the key down continuously like
I'm going to hold.
How about shift.
Okay.
Three two one.
I'm holding it and then I'm going to release it.
There we go.
So key up only occurs when the release actually happens.
But it also runs just like key down.
It runs for any of the potential keys I could press whether they actually change the input or not.
I could hold a command option control the function key.
All of these are going to trigger those events which you may or may not want.
So there is a third event that we'll see input out at event listener key press key press actually differs
a little bit from browser to browser.
If you read the docs anywhere online and checkout MDMA explanation it explains how it's supposed to
work.
The idea is that for something to be considered a key press there needs to be a character showing up
in this input or a change like space.
I'll refresh the page and just as a fun little demo it's not fun or a demo but instead of clicking in
if I hit tab to select the input what do you think we'll show up over here only keep up because tab
when I'm pressing down on that it's actually moving me into this input it's focusing on the key down
so that tab event did not occur.
Or the key down event did not occur on the input but then it focused and then I released or that's the
order that things happen in behind the scenes.
So I release the tab key once I'm focused in the input.
OK.
So back to key press.
If I type a key like K we get key down my head I accidently hit em as well.
We get down and then press and then up.
But if I type something like shift we only get down and up.
If nothing is showing up in that input we're not considering that a key press.
What about a capital letter.
So shift and then t there we go.
It's hard to see because I have so much going on but what's happening is that the key press is only
occurring after a hit shift and then t and I get this uppercase t versus the key down in the key up
are firing both for shift and for T.
So those are three different options for listening to events in an input or on the body for example
there are three different input events they are different.
Generally I mean it depends on what you're doing if you're making a game for example and you wanted
to have arrow keys to move something around you probably would not want key press key press is not going
to give you the the impact that you want.
If I click here and I hit the right arrow I'm not getting key press at all.
I'm not changing the input but if I hit L or some act some character that's showing up that key press
event fires.
So that's one situation where you may not want to keep press but if you want to know when something
is actually changing in the input so you don't care if a user is hitting shift you don't care if they're
hitting return you want to know what's in the input.
You could use key press instead.
What's interesting about key press interesting might be a stretch but it's important to note that when
you hit return it actually does count as a key press.
I just hit return and we got press over here even though nothing changed in the input.
If I type clearly that's a key press and if I hit delete which I'll do right now that is not considered
a key press that's just a up and down but return is a press.
So why am I showing you this.
Well a lot of the time we want to listen for specifically a return press or an enter key press meaning
that the user has typed something in and they're hitting return to submit or to finish.
So if we wanted to make a very simple I wouldn't even call it an application but a to do list or something.
A shopping list where we have an input.
Let's do this down here.
Had an H3 shopping list and then we'll add in a well that will start empty.
We'll give it an I.D. of items.
Sure and then we'll also add in an input and it will be type equals text I.D. equals.
Which we call it and add item and we'll give it a place holder of enter a food or something OK now from
our app yes I want to select that input so I'll do contact ad item.
Input equals document dot query selector.
We have an idea that we added I think it was ad item and I'll also select that you will while we're
here.
Concept let's call it items you all equals document that query selector.
Our good friend I.D. of items.
Now I'm going to add an event listener to the ADD item input and I'll do an add event listener of key
press.
I want to listen for when a user hits return and when they do hit return we'll take whatever is in here.
Let's say fish a hit return.
I'll clear out the input I'll grab that information and make a new ally with that data but only on return.
So we could do it for key up or key down as well but I'm not going to because those fires so much so
much more often.
For example if we have shifty like that that is two key downs or two key ups.
First is if I'm using key press I only get one.
You're not seeing it show up here but I'm only getting a key press event when the capital T shows up.
So I'm going to go with key press function and then this part is very important.
We want the event object and we're going to start by just consider logging that event object that object
as we saw very recently contains the information about the event.
So it should contain the key that was pressed.
Here we go.
We've got a keyboard event.
It has a bunch of stuff but I prefer to stick with key to keep it simple here.
We also have code that's a bigger topic.
We don't have to go into now but let's see what we get.
Shouldn't have closed that when I hit enter.
Key is set to enter.
Okay.
Also key code I believe is 1 13 and 13 for enter.
So we could use either of those this key code is standard across all browsers.
I'm pretty sure using key is also standard these days.
The way I learned when I was learning this stuff was key code.
But it's just so annoying to have to use a number as the key that you're typing compared to a key string.
And then in here we can simply check if event dot key equals enter.
If that happens we'll add a new item to list.
Otherwise we don't need to do anything we don't want to do anything.
We just leave a user alone so they can keep typing but if they do hit enter we want to grab the value
from that input.
So what would be the easiest way to do that.
Well we have the inputs selected.
I could also just say this that value console that log this stock value.
Why don't we start there and see what happens so I'm going to start typing in here.
I need cat food.
I'm going to hit enter.
Hey there we go.
We've got cat food showing up.
I need to get cat litter.
And it shows up over here so we'll grab that value and save it to a variable contest new item text or
something.
Equals this top value.
Then we'll select our items you will which we have actually already selected and we want to append a
new ally.
So let's make our new item equals document that create elements of an ally.
And then we'll set new item dot in our text to be this new item text that we grabbed from this stock
value so we extract the value and then we create a new ally.
We use that value we extracted to set the enter text of that ally and then we should append it.
So we have items you will append or append child of new item.
Let's see if it works.
So we have a well down here right now.
It's empty but I'll add something in like chicken breast.
There we go.
We're missing one thing which is we're not clearing this input which is very easy to do.
We can just call this dot value equals empty string.
The input which is this add item input dot value where we fetched or retrieved the actual value a user
entered will now set it to be empty.
So every time I hit enter.
Awesome.
Very simple example but this is a really common pattern.
Listen for an enter key or some other key and do something based off of that.
So that's one example.
I'll stop here.
Let's just recap the difference again between key upkeep down and key press key up and key down are
going to fire for any key that you touch at all one will fire when you press it down the other one doesn't
fire until it's released but it includes things like shift or arrow keys.
Caps lock a key press does not the way key press is supposed to work which is not always the case sometimes
there's some weirdness across browsers but the intended use for key press is that it only fires when
in the case of an input something actually shows up like a shift K would be one key press instead of
two key down or two key ups it would be one key press an arrow key does not count at all.
Something needs to show up here or the user hits enter which now that I'm looking at this we should
probably add in a quick little check and just return early if this dot value.
How about if not this top value return.
So instead of checking if this stuff value is an empty string we'll just check if it's truly or falsely
actually and then we go and nothing happens but if I have some stuff it does work but if I hit enter
and there's no value we're ignoring it we return early we just get out of this entire function.
Awesome.